Added RHOBS Architecture [ROMS] (#48)
rhobs/handbook: content/Services/RHOBS/design.md

Those sub-projects were chosen because of their similar architecture, scalability patterns and open source practices. The key fact is that they all use object storage as the primary data store, which allows cheap long-term retention of the (mostly) immutable observability data.

The RHOBS service uses Observatorium. We deploy Observatorium on multiple clusters in multiple regions. It also adds integration services and connections to Red Hat-specific dependencies. The rest of the document describes all the pieces in detail.

> NOTE: This document will focus on the metric signal. Logging is only partially deployed in certain places but is not yet a critical dependency on anything. It is also deployed in logical and network separation to the metric backend, so it should not affect the metric system; thus, all signals can be described separately. Tracing is in heavy progress as well.

## Metrics

### Architecture

The current high-level architecture of the production service looks as follows:

![](../../assets/rhobs-design1.png)

Legend:

* Blue background: Managed by RHOBS.

> * Grey background: Third-party managed software.

Reviewer: The S3 buckets have green backgrounds, so maybe that should be specified too (as they are run by AWS + appSRE).

* Orange arrows: Metric ingestion.
* Red arrows: Firing alert notifications.
* Green arrow: Metric / Rules / Alerts Read API traffic.
* Black lines: Backbone communication (e.g. with object storage or authZ/authN with SSO).

> The RHOBs design is based on multiple shards that represent isolated [RHOBS-specific Observatorium](https://github.com/rhobs/configuration) installations. Shards are currently deployed to two clusters, but the design is prepared to have more clusters in different regions to lower the damage radius for regional incidents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RHOBS design is based on multiple shards that represent isolated [RHOBS-specific Observatorium](https://github.com/rhobs/configuration) installations. Shards are currently deployed to two clusters, but the design is prepared to have more clusters in different regions to lower the damage radius for regional incidents.
```

All clusters are [the OSD](https://docs.openshift.com/dedicated/welcome/index.html), multi-availability zone clusters scheduled using AppSRE's AppInterface declarative GitOps API. See (behind VPN):

* [telemeter-prod-01](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/app-interface/-/blob/master/data/openshift/telemeter-prod-01/cluster.yml)
* [rhobsp02ue1](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/app-interface/-/blob/master/data/openshift/rhobsp02ue1/cluster.yml)

Each Observatorium installation represents RHOBS "shard" and uses multiple Kubernetes namespaces. Typically single shard is limited by the single cluster capacity (amount of the nodes it can handle--usually around 200 for OSD), so we keep a single shard in a single cluster. The only exception is `Telemeter` deployment, which for historical reasons is a separate ("hard") tenant deployed next to `MST` in one cluster. `Telemeter` tenant is used for [OpenShift remote health monitoring](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_openshift_container_storage/4.5/html/monitoring_openshift_container_storage/remote_health_monitoring).

> > NOTE: Telemeter was the first responsibility of our service team in the past. We build RHOBS in a way that Telemeter can be a single-region hard tenant. It is isolated because it has different characteristics as typical observability data. It contains very cardinal data with only ~5m sample interval. There is no alerting, only analytic PromQL queries and integration with analytics tools like [obslytics](https://github.com/thanos-community/obslytics). We will focus on `MST` in this design as this is what will be used by the majority of the users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> NOTE: Telemeter was the first responsibility of our service team in the past. We built RHOBS in a way that Telemeter can be a single-region hard tenant. It is isolated because it has different characteristics than typical observability data. It contains very cardinal data with only ~5m sample interval. There is no alerting, only analytic PromQL queries and integration with analytics tools like [obslytics](https://github.com/thanos-community/obslytics). We will focus on `MST` in this design as this is what will be used by the majority of the users.
```

* Metric ingestion in Prometheus data model.
* Metric storage, including long-term storage using object storage.
* Querying APIs using PromQL language.
* Other metric,rule and alert retrieval APIs [supported by Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/api/): [Full list](https://github.com/observatorium/api/blob/23af39e5f09845a12dec7179c47b0b364f0a35b0/api/metrics/v1/http.go#L27).
* Custom recording rule evaluation.
* Custom alerting rule evaluation and routing.

At the current moment, the design assumes no cross-communication across shards. No data replication or cross-shard queries. However, in future, there is a plan to [add a federation layer that will allow cross-shard querying](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHOBS-40) and a truly global view of observability data. Currently, the user can do that on their own using software like [Thanos Querier](https://thanos.io/tip/components/query.md/, [promxy](https://github.com/jacksontj/promxy) or by graphing multiple Queries with [Grafana](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/).

> The RHOBS have [the following dependencies](https://visual-app-interface.devshift.net/services#/services/rhobs/app.yml):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RHOBS has [the following dependencies](https://visual-app-interface.devshift.net/services#/services/rhobs/app.yml):
```

![](../../assets/rhobs-deps.png)

From the deployment point of view:

* AWS (EC2 and S3)
* OSD with AppSRE local monitoring.
* [Red Hat SSO](https://sso.redhat.com/auth/realms/redhat-external)
* [Account Manager Service (AMS)](https://visual-app-interface.devshift.net/services#/services/ocm/ams/app.yml)

> NOTE: We also have a set of staging and testing clusters, which are not covered in this document.

Now, look at a single shard RHOBS architecture at the microservice level.

### Services and Interaction Points

> The ful ![](../../assets/rhobs-microsvc.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![](../../assets/rhobs-microsvc.png)
```

Reviewer: I can't really comment on the diagram file, so commenting here instead.

So currently Thanos Stateless Ruler is not used. It is deployed, but is defunct, as we do not configure any Rules on it. After an attempt to deploy it last time it was decided that in its current state it is not able to perform well with evaluating and remote writing Rule data for multiple tenants, which is something we need. 

Also, Thanos Receive `ketama`  hashing is only on testing cluster for now.

If this diagram represents a near-term future RHOBS service then I think the above points can be ignored, as we plan to switch those components! 🙂

Reviewer: We also [plan](https://github.com/rhobs/configuration/pull/301) to deploy obsctl-reloader as an acceptance testing component for generating load in rhobs tenant, for Rules API SLI measurement. 🙂

Author: > So currently Thanos Stateless Ruler is not used. It is deployed, but is defunct, as we do not configure any Rules on it. After an attempt to deploy it last time it was decided that in its current state it is not able to perform well with evaluating and remote writing Rule data for multiple tenants, which is something we need.

True, but that's a detail. We know the future direction. I can put that into a risk though (: 

> We also https://github.com/rhobs/configuration/pull/301 to deploy obsctl-reloader as an acceptance testing component for generating load in rhobs tenant, for Rules API SLI measurement. slightly_smiling_face

Nice!

| [observatorium-gubernator](https://github.com/rhobs/configuration/blob/1861e53c2932baf65b82b358a67033c9704915e0/resources/services/observatorium-template.yaml#L1097) | Deployment  | https://quay.io/app-sre/gubernator           | Distributed rate-limiter for API traffic handled by observatorium-api.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | -                                                                 |

#### Storage Components

Storage components are responsible for reading, ingesting and processing metric-related data in a multi-tenant and efficient way. Specifically, the data are:

* Metric Series (samples associated with labels)
* Recording rules.
* Alerting rules.
* Exemplars (ingestion disabled for now).
* Metadata (ingestion disabled for now).

> The majority of components in come [the Thanos project](https://thanos.io/) which is at the core of the metric RHOBS system and shared some code with Prometheus. We also run native [Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/alertmanager/)) from the Prometheus project. The team also actively contributes to and maintains Thanos & Prometheus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The majority of components come under [the Thanos project](https://thanos.io/) which is at the core of the metric RHOBS system and shares some code with Prometheus. We also run native [Alertmanager](https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/alertmanager/) from the Prometheus project. The team also actively contributes to and maintains Thanos & Prometheus.
```

* DDOS: TBD
* Tenant Misconfiguration/Misbehave: TBD
* Scaling Writes: TBD
* Scaling Reads: TBD
* Restarts of Thanos Receive Pods (Ingestion Pods)

#### Future

On top the above, in future we plan to add following user stories:

* Automatic scale outs and scale downs based on traffic
* Deletions
* Backfilling Recording Rules
* Sharing series with other tenants
* Usage Monitoring

### Tenancy

The RHOBS tenant identifies the owner of data (metrics, rules, etc.). The owner can then manage and query such data (including alert and recording rule evaluations). In future tenant will be able to [allow accessing subset of their metrics to other tenants](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHOBS-107). Single tenant is recommended for group of people or services that should have isolated access and responsibility over certain metric data.

The user management for who is part of tenant is out of the scope for RHOBS and should be handled outside of RHOBS, ideally with SSO team help. On the other hand, the RHOBS team manages RBAC that map certain service account `sub` ID token field to roles against certain tenant with read/write and metric/log/tracing granularity.

> The RHOBS tenancy is label based. It means that within Thanos we build features that allows limit, monitor, ingest, read series and isolate for specific labels. In our case it's the `tenant_id = <TENANT>`. The correct `tenant_id` is found on `observatorium-api` level:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RHOBS tenancy is label based. It means that within Thanos we build features that allow limiting, monitoring, ingesting, reading series, and isolating for specific labels. In our case it's the `tenant_id = <TENANT>` label. The correct `tenant_id` is found on `observatorium-api` level:
```
